\chapter{The program model}

{\Technique} models the part of the program which is directly involved
in a crash via the {\StateMachine} mechanism, but these are only
capable of analysing relatively small fragments of the program.  This
means that they cannot capture global program properties such as the
structure of the heap.  {\Technique} instead captures these properties
in its \introduction{program model}, a model of some important
properties of the program built before the main analysis starts.  This
model incorporates the results of both dynamic and static analyses.
The main components of the model are:

\begin{itemize}
\item The indirect branch table, which indicates, for every indirect
  branch instruction in the program, the set of possible target
  instructions for that branch.  This is collected by a dynamic
  analysis described in
  Section~\ref{sect:program_model:indirect_branches}.

\item The dynamic aliasing model.  This models the aliasing behaviour
  of the accesses which the program makes to non-stack locations, such
  as the heap and global memory.  This is, again, collected by a
  dynamic analysis, described in
  Section~\ref{sect:program_model:dynamic_alias}.

\item A function table, showing how the instructions in the program
  are grouped together into functions.  This is built by a static
  analysis, with the indirect branch table as one of its inputs.  It
  is described in Section~\ref{sect:program_model:functions}.

\item The static aliasing model.  This shows how each function makes
  use of its local stack frame, and is hence useful for resolving
  aliasing queries between memory accesses which access the stack.  It
  is built by a static analysis which is described in
  Section~\ref{sect:program_model:static_aliasing}.

\item The known registers table.  This tracks whether particular
  registers are either constants or fixed offsets from other registers
  at particular instructions in the program.  It is derived by means
  of a static analysis described in
  Section~\ref{sect:program_model:fixed_regs}.
\end{itemize}

\section{Indirect branch analysis}
\label{sect:program_model:indirect_branches}

\todo{This is arguably too simple to be worth talking about, much less
  giving a whole section to.}

{\Technique} relies on being able to determine which addresses a given
branch might branch to in order to build its \backref{CFGs} (see
Section~\ref{sect:derive:build_static_cfg}).  This is trivial for
direct branches, but more difficult for indirect ones.
{\Implementation} solves this problem using a very simple dynamic
analysis, based on Valgrind\needCite{}, which simply records every
indirect branch instruction executed in the program, including both
the source and destination instruction pointers.  The main analysis
then assumes that only edges observed during dynamic analysis are
possible in the running program.

This is clearly unsound, as there might always be some behaviour which
is possible for the program but which is not observed by the dynamic
analysis.  This can lead to {\technique} building incomplete
\backref{CFGs}, and hence missing some bugs.  This is not, in
practice, a particularly series issue: most programs contain only a
modest number of dynamic branches, most of which can branch to only a
modest number of distinct targets, and so it does not take an enormous
amount of time for the dynamic analysis to achieve reasonable
coverage.  Even when coverage is incomplete, the most common effect is
simply to cause the main analysis to miss some bugs in code which was
not run under the dynamic analysis, which is an acceptable problem.

\todo{Hmm... The patch strategy generation step assumes it can find
  all of the predecessors of an instruction in order to fix the
  corrupted instruction problem.  Getting that wrong will crash the
  program when you try to fix it.  There's an explanation of why it's
  not usually a big deal in the section on patch strategy generation,
  but it wouldn't hurt to recap here.}

\subsection{Finding the predecessors of instructions}
\label{sect:program_model:instr_predecessors}

\todo{Building a CFG relies on being able to find the predecessors of
  an instruction, which depends on the dynamic alias analysis, so I
  don't want to describe it until after I've explained that.  On the
  other hand, once you have the dynamic alias analysis, it becomes
  trivial.}

Recall that the algorithm for building a \backref{crashing thread}'s
static control-flow graph, given in
Section~\ref{sect:derive:build_static_cfg} depends on being able to
find the predecessor instructions of any instruction.  That is, it
assumes that there is some function $\mathit{pred}(i)$ which maps from
one of the program's instructions $i$ to the set of all instructions
in the program which might execute immediately before $i$ in a
particular thread.  The indirect branch analysis allows {\technique}
to build a complete \backref{CFG} for most programs, and hence to
implement the $\mathit{pred}$ easily.  The key observation is that,
for most programs on most operating systems, the processor will only
start executing instructions from the main program binary following an
indirect branch from a library\footnote{The only common exceptions on
  Linux are the \texttt{\_start} routine, which can be trivially
  located by parsing the ELF meta-data, and signal handlers, which
  {\technique} does not consider.  Shared libraries cannot call into
  the main program binary via a direct branch as they must support
  being linked into multiple programs without any modifications to
  their machine code.  \todo{Not sure how convincing that is.}}, and
so the indirect branch table contains all ``roots'' of the program
CFG.  Simply disassembling forwards from these roots then gives the
entire CFG of all reachable instructions in the program binary.

There is one common exception to this rule: JIT compilers\needCite{}.
A JIT compiler will often generate code which branches back into the
JIT itself, and these branches can be direct.  {\Implementation} will
not behave correctly in this case.  If this were to become a problem
then it would be reasonably simple to design another direct analysis
which simply tracked all branches from outside the main program binary
to addresses in the program binary, which avoid the issue.

\section{Dynamic alias analysis}
\label{sect:program_model:dynamic_alias}

\todo{There's a tension here between precision and soundness which
  I've completely ignored.  Oh well.}

{\Technique} relies on a dynamic analysis to model memory accesses to
non-stack memory locations.  This analysis is responsible for building
an \introduction{aliasing table}, showing which pairs of instructions
might conceivably access the same memory locations.  In the pessimal
case, where every instruction might alias with every other, this table
will contain $n^2$ entries, where $n$ is the number of memory
accessing instructions in the program, which would be unfeasibly large
for non-trivial programs; fortunately, the table is in practice very
sparse, and so is usually perfectly manageable.  

\todo{This is a slightly abstract way of describing this.  I think
  it's still probably the best way of thinking about it, but perhaps
  not the best way of explaining it.}

The intuition behind this analysis is that most fields in most data
structures are accessed by a relatively small number of instructions
in the program, and so if it were possible to identify the field being
accessed by a given instruction then that would make it easy to
determine whether two instructions might interfere.  More concretely,
if we had an instruction $\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}(i)$ mapping from
an instruction to the set of fields which it can access then

\begin{displaymath}
\mathit{alias}(i, i') = (\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}(i) \cap \mathit{instr\_to\_fields}(i') \not= \varnothing)
\end{displaymath}

where $\mathit{alias}(i, i')$ is an alias function which is true when
there is some possibility of instructions $i$ and $i'$ accessing the
same memory location.  Unfortunately, the $\mathit{instr\_to\_field}$
function is difficult to express for binary programs, even with
perfect information, because fields are a high-level language
construct and {\technique} must operate at the level of machine code.

A little bit of algebra allows us to re-express $\mathit{alias}$ like
so:

\begin{displaymath}
\mathit{alias}(i, i') = \left(i' \in \bigcup_{f \in \mathit{instr\_to\_fields}(i)} \mathit{field\_to\_instrs}(f)\right)
\end{displaymath}

We now have two functions which are defined in terms of fields,
$\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}$ and $\mathit{field\_to\_instrs}$, rather
than one, which might appear to have made the problem worse, except
that the composition of the two functions, $\mathit{instr\_label}(i) =
\{\mathit{field\_to\_instrs}(f) | f \in
\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}(i)\}$, does not make any reference to
fields.  This suggests that it should be implementable, and it is this
function which the dynamic analysis computes\footnote{In fact, the
  actual output of the {\implementation} dynamic analysis phase is the
  function $i \rightarrow \cup \mathit{instr\_label}(i)$, which
  flattens one level of $\mathit{instr\_label}$'s set structure, as
  that is the most convenient form for the later phases of the
  analysis.  Internally, it computes the full $\mathit{instr\_label}$
  function.}.

The types of these functions are perhaps informative:

\begin{itemize}
\item $\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}: \mathit{instruction} \rightarrow \mathit{set}(\mathit{field})$
\item $\mathit{field\_to\_instrs}: \mathit{field} \rightarrow \mathit{set}(\mathit{instruction})$
\item $\mathit{instr\_label}: \mathit{instruction} \rightarrow \mathit{set}(\mathit{set}(\mathit{instruction}))$
\end{itemize}

In other words, $\mathit{instr\_label}$ is formed from
$\mathit{instr\_to\_fields}$ by identifying fields with sets of
instructions.  This can be thought of as analogous to the conceptual
switch between data types in a functional language and those in an
object-oriented language.  In a functional language, a data type is
identified with a set of values, whereas in an object-oriented one the
type is identified with a set of operators which can be applied to
values\needCite{}.  In the same way, the intended semantics of this
analysis talks about the set of fields which an instruction can
access, which is in some sense like the set of values on which it can
operate, whereas the actual analysis discovers the set of instructions
which it can interact with, which is like a set of operations.

\todo{Maybe draw an explicit analogy with de Bruijn indices?}

Given this conceptual work, implementing the dynamic analysis itself
is quite simple.  {\Implementation} does so using a Valgrind
skin\needCite{}.  The program's memory is divided into fixed-size
chunks, each of which has a label consisting of a set of accessing
instructions\footnote{{\Implementation} also tracks which accesses are
  reads, which writes, and which both, as this simplifies the
  implementation of the later analysis phases, but this does not
  meaningfully change the algorithm.}.  Any instruction which accesses
that memory chunk adds itself to the set.  The set of all labels
generated by the program, suitable indexed, is then an approximation
to the $\mathit{instr\_label}$ function; if the dynamic analysis is
able to observe all relevant program behaviour then it is precisely
equal to $\mathit{instr\_label}$.

This scheme, as presented, has one important weakness, which is that
it assigns labels to addresses in memory.  Mapping back to high-level
language constructs, this means that it is assuming that each address
in the program, once allocated, corresponds to the same type of data
structure throughout the program's life.  In other words, it assumes
that memory is type stable\needCite{}.  This is generally reasonable
for statically-allocated structures, such as those in the BSS
segment\needCite{}, but not for dynamically-allocated structures such
as those allocated via \texttt{malloc} or \texttt{operator new}.
{\Implementation} relies on being able to identify such dynamic memory
allocators so that it can reset the labels on memory addresses.  This
is easy for allocators provided by standard system libraries, such as
\texttt{malloc}, but much harder for program-specific allocators.  It
might be possible to identify such allocators using a variant of the
techniques described in \todo{cite the digging for data structures
  paper here}, but I have not investigated that at this time.
Instead, {\implementation} relies on manually annotating allocation
functions in the program.  This is not an unreasonable burden: for
mysql, the necessary annotations amount to an additional twenty lines
across the entire program, and none of the other programs examined in
the evaluation required any annotations at all.

{\Implementation} includes one minor refinement to the basic analysis
described above.  It is fairly common for programs to allocate new
heap structures using a function such as \texttt{malloc} and to then
initialise this structure using a series of stores.  These stores will
never race (provided that \texttt{malloc} is implemented correctly)
and it would be helpful to avoid spending excessive time considering
the case where they do.  The approach taken is simple: when a block is
returned from \texttt{malloc} it is marked as thread-private, and
remains so until it is stored to non-stack memory.  Entries in the
aliasing table then include a flag indicating whether the access is
thread-private or potentially racing.  Later analysis phases can then
assume that two thread-private accesses in different threads cannot
alias with each other.

This policy might seem to be overly conservative: a block of memory is
marked as shared whenever a pointer to it is stored into any non-stack
memory, even when that non-stack memory is itself marked as
thread-private.  This is necessary because the analysis does not
attempt to track the heap reachability graph, and in particular cannot
map from one block to the set of blocks reachable from that block.  It
is therefore not safe to ``upgrade'' a block from thread-private to
thread-shared if there is any possibility of that block containing a
thread-private pointer; upgrading blocks early and pessimistically
means that it is never necessary to do so.  This rule can potentially
lead to large amounts of memory being marked as thread-shared when it
is not strictly necessary to do so, but does still allow simple
structure initialisation operations to be marked as thread private.
\todo{Yurk.}

\subsection{Why is the stack handled differently from the heap?}
\todo{This doesn't really belong here.  It doesn't really belong
  anywhere else, either, though.}

The decision to handle the stack differently from the heap perhaps
requires further explanation.  This is a fundamentally pragmatic
decision.  Ideally, {\technique} would use only sound static analyses
to resolve aliasing problems, minimising the risk of false positives
and negatives, but this is simply not practical when analysing the
program's heap.  The heap structure can itself be very complicated, in
terms of which parts might contain pointers to which other parts, and
the information needed to derive this structure can be scattered
throughout the program.  This means that even with access to the
program's source deriving a useful model of the heap is a fearsome
challenge\needCite{}; doing it with just a binary is completely
infeasible.

The stack, on the other hand, has a much simpler structure.  Many
stack locations will have no pointers to them at all (except for the
stack pointer itself), and those which do rarely participate in
complicated object graphs.  Even better, all of the information needed
to characterise the structure of a given function's stack frame is
usually present in the function itself.  These two facts combine to
make a (mostly) sound static analysis feasible in many interesting
cases.

\todo{Also useful: stack accesses are more frequent than heap ones, so
  a dynamic analysis will have less overhead if it confines itself to
  only considering heap accesses.}

\subsection{Comparison to other aliasing analyses}

\todo{I'm not convinced this adds all that much; might just kill it.}

\todo{This doesn't really belong in the program model chapter.}

There is some standard terminology for describing compiler alias
analyses\editorial{Cite Hind 2001.}.  It does not apply perfectly in
this context, but here's an attempt to do so anyway:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The analysis is partly flow-sensitive.  Two accesses are only
  considered to alias if the control flow of the {\StateMachine}
  allows them to occur in an appropriate order, but higher-order
  control flow dependencies are not tracked.  \todo{I did find a cite
    for another alias analysis which has the same kind of sensitivity,
    but I now seem to have lost it.  I should dig that up again.}
\item
  The analysis is not context-sensitive in the usual optimising
  compiler sense of examining a function's calling context, beyond
  that which has been incorporated into the {\StateMachine}.  On the
  other hand, the {\StateMachine}-level analysis does use context
  information from the static analysis phase.
\item
  The heap is not modelled at all.  Instead, the objects which are
  pointed at are frames on the stack, or a special value indicating
  that a value points at something other than a stack frame.
\item
  Aggregates, as such, do not really exist, and so aggregate modelling
  is not entirely meaningful.  To the extent that it does mean
  something, the analysis distinguishes aggregate fields.
\item
  The analysis operates on whole {\StateMachines}, and hence on small
  fragments of the original program.
\item
  The alias representation is a hybrid, including both an explicit
  alias table and a points-to table. \todo{Could actually build the
    aliasing table lazily, which might be a bit faster but would make
    everything much more confusing; ref demand driven aliasing
    analysis, maybe?}
\end{itemize}

\section{Function discovery}
\label{sect:program_model:functions}

\todo{I need to check how IDA and CodeSurfer deal with this; I suspect
  the algorithm's pretty similar, just because there aren't that many
  options for doing this which are actually correct.}

{\Technique}'s static analysis passes are all\editorial{All the ones
  I'm describing, anyway; there are a couple of cross-function ones,
  but they're not very interesting.} defined in terms of functions,
but these are not always apparent at the level of machine code.  It is
therefore necessary to, first, define what is meant by a function,
and, second, to show how to discover functions in a binary program.
The definition used by {\technique} is simple:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Every instruction must be assigned to some function.
\item
  No instruction can be assigned to more than one function.
  \todo{There's a whole gaping chasm of complexity hiding under there
    (e.g. interaction with cross-function constant propagation), but I
    don't really want to talk about it, so I'm just going to ignore
    it.}
\item
  Every function has a designated entry point instruction, referred to
  as the \introduction{function head}.
\item
  The target of a \texttt{call} instruction is always the
  \backref{head} of some function.
\item
  Any branch instruction will either start and end in the same
  function or will end at a \backref{function head}, or both.  This
  includes the implicit branch to the next instruction at the end of
  an ordinary instruction.
\end{itemize}

Note that the instructions in a function do not have to be contiguous,
and so, for instance, code outlining is correctly
handled\editorial{Cite Zhou 2005 or US patent 2007/0089106, unless I
  can find something better.}.

It is worthwhile discussing briefly how this definition interacts with
compiler tail-call elimination optimisations.  There are three
interesting cases:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  If a function is ever called normally, using a call-type branch, the
  fourth rule will ensure that its first instruction is a
  \backref{function head}, as desired.
\item
  If a function is tail-called from precisely one place, and is never
  invoked with a normal call instruction, no entry point will be
  created for it and it will be merged into its calling function.  The
  two functions will be analysed as if they were a single function.
\item
  If a function is tail-called from multiple different locations then
  the final rule will ensure that the join of the caller's CFGs is a
  \backref{function head}.  This is as desired: for simple tail calls,
  the join is the first instruction in the called function, which should
  indeed be marked as a head.
\end{itemize}

In other words, any function head inferred by these rules will
correspond to the first instruction of one of the program's actual
functions.  This is important because the platform ABI will place
various constraints on the state of the program at the start of
functions, and these constraints are very useful for the other static
analysis passes.

\begin{figure}
\begin{algorithmic}[1]
  \State $\mathit{instrToHead} \gets \map{}$
  \State $\mathit{pending} \gets \queue{}$
  \State {Add all program entry points, as defined by ELF meta-data to $\mathit{pending}$\editorial{Fairly {\implementation}-specific}}
  \State {Add all targets of indirect calls discovered by the dynamic analysis to $\mathit{pending}$.}
  \While {$\mathit{pending}$ is not empty}
    \State $\mathit{head} \gets \mathit{pop}(\mathit{pending})$
    \State $p \gets \queue{\mathit{head}}$
    \While {$p$ is not empty}
      \State $i \gets \mathit{pop}(p)$
      \State $\mathit{oldH} \gets \mapIndex{\mathit{instrToHead}}{i}$
      \If {$\mathit{oldH} = \varnothing$} \Comment{New instruction in this function}
        \State $\mapIndex{\mathit{instrToHead}}{i} = \mathit{head}$
        \State {Disassemble $i$}
        \If {$i$ is a direct call to $i'$}
          \State {Add $i'$ to $\mathit{pending}$}
        \EndIf
        \State {$p = p + \textsc{succ}(i)$}
      \ElsIf {$\mathit{oldH} = \mathit{head}$} \Comment{Already found this instruction}
        \State \textbf{continue}
      \ElsIf {$\mathit{oldH} = i \vee i \in \mathit{pending}$} \Comment{Tail call into another known function}
        \State \textbf{continue}
      \Else \Comment {Tail call which contradicts existing assignment}
        \State {Remove all references to $\mathit{oldH}$ from $\mathit{instrToHead}$}
        \State {Add $i$ and $\mathit{oldH}$ to $\mathit{pending}$}
      \EndIf
    \EndWhile
  \EndWhile
\end{algorithmic}
\caption{Algorithm for assigning instructions to functions and
  identifying function heads.  The $\textsc{succ}(i)$ function finds
  all of the non-call successors of instruction $i$.  For a non-call
  instruction, this is the set of instructions which might execute
  immediately after $i$ (computing this may require reference to the
  results of the indirect branch analysis).  For a call instruction,
  it is the address to which the call will return. \todo{This is
    \emph{far} more detail than I wanted to go into on this.}}
\label{fig:function_head_alg}
\end{figure}

The full algorithm for discovering the program's function call
structure is given in Figure~\ref{fig:function_head_alg}.  This is
hopefully reasonably clear.  It begins with a list of all of the
function heads which can be inferred from the program's meta-data and
the dynamic analysis and considers each in turn.  It explores forwards
through each function's control flow graph, adding instructions to the
$\mathit{instrToHead}$ map as it goes.  The only part which is perhaps
surprising is on line 22, which handles the case where the analysis
finds a branch from one function to the middle of another.  To see how
this can happen, consider a program with three functions, $a$, $b$,
and $c$, where $a$ and $b$ both tail-call into $c$, and suppose that
$a$ is explored before $b$.  The exploration of $a$ will discover $c$
and, since it is invoked by a tail-call and is indistinguishable from
a normal branch, will treat $c$ as just another part of $a$.  When the
algorithm moves on to consider $b$, it will discover the tail-call to
$c$, which is currently just another instruction $a$.  The algorithm
will then realise it made a mistake when exploring $a$, remove
function $a$ from $\mathit{instrToHead}$, and record that it needs to
explore both $a$ and $c$.  When it does explore $a$ it will correctly
recognise the branch to $c$ as a tail call and the algorithm will
finish.

\section{Static alias analysis}
\label{sect:program_model:static_aliasing}

\todo{On the one hand, this is a bit noddy, and not really
  particularly insightful.  On the other hand, it is often quite
  useful, and I've not seen anyone else doing precisely the same
  thing.}

The dynamic aliasing analysis is effective at resolving aliasing
queries between instructions which access shared memory, but does not
provided any assistance with instructions which might access the local
stack.  {\Technique} instead handles these using a machine code-level
static points-to analysis.  As with the dynamic analysis, the results
of this static analysis are used as input to both the {\StateMachine}
simplifier and the symbolic execution engine.

The key assumption made by this analysis is that locations in the
local stack frame are ``created'' when the function starts.  This
means that there cannot be any pointers to such locations before the
function starts, except for the stack pointer, whether in registers,
non-stack memory, or indeed the new stack frame itself, and the
program must not be able to calculate any from the pointers which it
does have (excluding the stack pointer itself).  A pointer here is
defined to be something which is eventually dereferenced, rather than
something which just has a numerical value which happens to match the
local stack frame, so that, for instance, pointers in dead registers
are acceptable.  An important corollary of this is that the address of
the stack must have been unknown when the program was compiled, and so
statically constant values cannot be stack pointers.

The analysis is structured as a least fixed point iteration which
builds a mapping \textit{configurations} from instructions to
\textsc{configuration}s, defined in
Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:abstract_domain}, starting from the state shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:initial_config}, updating instructions
according to the relationships described in
Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:update_rules}, and merging control-flow
joins using the $\sqcup$ operator defined in
Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:join_op}.  I now describe these figures
in slightly more detail.

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:abstract_domain}, the abstract domain}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \textsc{configuration} = (\bot: \textsc{1}) + \left(\begin{array}{rl}%
      \mathit{regs}         :& \textsc{Reg} \rightarrow \left(\begin{array}{rl}%
        \mathit{nonPointer}   :& \textsc{Bool}\\
        \mathit{stackPointer} :& \textsc{Bool}\\
        \mathit{otherPointer} :& \textsc{Bool}
      \end{array}\right)\\
      \mathit{stackInStack} :& \textsc{Bool} \\
      \mathit{stackInOther} :& \textsc{Bool}
    \end{array}\right)
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Abstract interpretation domain for static alias analysis.}
  \label{fig:static_alias:abstract_domain}
\end{figure}

The aim of this analysis is to construct a mapping from instructions
to \textsc{configurations}, which are defined in
Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:abstract_domain}.  This is less
complicated than it appears.  A \textsc{configuration} can be either
$\bot$, indicating that the instruction is unreachable, or a it can
consist of a 3-tuple of $\mathit{regs}$, $\mathit{stackInStack}$, and
$\mathit{stackInOther}$.  Within that tuple:

\begin{itemize}
\item $\mathit{stackInStack}$ is true if there is any possibility that
  the function's local stack frame contains a pointer back to the
  frame when that instruction executes.
\item $\mathit{stackInOther}$ is true if there is any possibility that
  memory outside of the function's local frame might contain a pointer
  into the frame.
\item $\mathit{regs}$ is a function from registers to three-tuples of
  boolean flags showing what that register might point at:
  $\mathit{nonPointer}$, which is true if the register might contain a
  non-pointer value, $\mathit{stackPointer}$, which is true if it
  might point at the current stack frame, and $\mathit{otherPointer}$,
  which is true if it might contain a pointer to something other than
  the current stack frame.
\end{itemize}

The analysis builds the $\mathit{configurations}$ map from
instructions to the \textsc{configuration} which applies at the start
of that instruction.  This mapping is initially optimistic, but will
have become conservative by the time the fixed-point iteration
converges.

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:initial_config}, the initial configuration}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{rl}
      \textsc{configuration}[\mathit{head}] = & \left(\begin{array}{lll}
        \mathit{regs} & \textsc{RSP} & = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!
        \end{array}\right)\\
        \mathit{regs} & r \in \mathit{argRegs} & = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}\!\!\!
        \end{array}\right)\\
        \mathit{regs} & \_ & = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false}\!\!\!
        \end{array}\right)\\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInStack}} & = \mathit{false}\\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInOther}} & = \mathit{false}\\
      \end{array}\right)\\
      \textsc{configuration}[i] = & \bot\\
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Starting point for the static alias analysis fixed point.
    $\mathit{head}$ is the \backref{function head} instruction and $i$
    is any other instruction.}
  \label{fig:static_alias:initial_config}
\end{figure}

In the initial configuration, most instructions in the function are in
the \textsc{configuration} $\bot$, indicating that they are currently
believed to be unreachable.  The exception is the function head
instruction, which has a fixed configuration given in the figure.
In a little more detail:

\begin{itemize}
\item At the start of the function, the \textsc{RSP} register
  definitely points at the current stack frame.
\item Argument registers could contain non-pointer values or pointers
  to things outside of the current stack frame, but cannot contain
  pointers to the current stack frame itself.  This reflects the
  assumption that the stack frame is created by the \texttt{call}
  instruction, and so there is no way for the caller to have obtained
  a pointer to it.
\item Similarly, the stack frame does not initially contain any
  pointers to itself.  Non-stack memory is likewise free of pointers
  to the frame.
\item Non-argument registers cannot contain any values at all.  This
  reflects the fact that the platform ABI leaves the value of all
  non-argument registers undefined at the start of a function, and so
  the function cannot depend on their values.  The analysis can
  therefore safely treat these registers as containing nothing at all.
\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:join_op}, the join operator $\sqcup$}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{l}
    \bot \sqcup x    = x \\
    x    \sqcup \bot = x \\
    x    \sqcup y    = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
      \textit{regs r} = &\!\!\! \left(\begin{array}{rll}
        \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\! (x.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{nonPointer} & \vee \\
                              & \multicolumn{2}{r}{(y.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{nonPointer}} \\
        \mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!(x.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{stackPointer} & \vee \\
                                & \multicolumn{2}{r}{(y.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{stackPointer}} \\
        \!\!\!\mathit{nonStackPointer} = &\!\!\! (x.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{nonStackPointer} & \vee \\
                                   & \multicolumn{2}{r}{(y.\textit{regs r}).\mathit{nonStackPointer}}
        \end{array}\right)\\
      \!\!\!\mathit{stackInStack} = &\!\!\! x.\mathit{stackInStack} \vee y.\mathit{stackInStack} \\
      \!\!\!\mathit{stackInOther} = &\!\!\! x.\mathit{stackInOther} \vee y.\mathit{stackInOther}
    \end{array}\right)
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Join operation $\sqcup$ on \textsc{configuration}s.}
  \label{fig:static_alias:join_op}
\end{figure}

The join operator $\sqcup$ is used when multiple
\textsc{configuration}s reach a single instruction over different
control-flow edges.  So, for instance, if instruction $a$ is reachable
from $b$ and $c$, the $E_b$ is the \textsc{configuration} at the end
of $b$, and $E_c$ that at the end of $c$, the \textsc{configuration}
at the start of $a$ will be $E_b \sqcup E_c$.  The $\sqcup$ operator
itself is quite simple: if either of the two predecessor instructions
is unreachable, take the \textsc{configuration} from the other one,
and otherwise take a point-wise union of the two input
\textsc{configuration}s.

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:update_rules}, the rule for calculating an end-of-instruction \textsc{configuration} from a start-of-instruction one}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{l}
    \textsc{Store reg}_1 \rightarrow \ast(\textsc{reg}_2) \hfill \circled{1}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\begin{array}{ll}
      \mathbf{let} & \mathit{pt}_1 = \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}(\textsc{reg}_1) \\
                   & \mathit{pt}_2 = \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}(\textsc{reg}_2) \\
      \mathbf{in} & \left(\begin{array}{rl}
        \mathit{regs} = &\!\!\! \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_2 = \mathit{pt}_2[\mathit{nonPointer} = \mathit{false}]] \\
        \!\!\!\mathit{stackInStack} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInStack} \vee (\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{stackPointer} \wedge \mathit{pt}_2.\mathit{stackPointer}) \\
        \!\!\!\mathit{stackInOther} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInOther} \vee (\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{stackPointer} \wedge \mathit{pt}_2.\mathit{otherPointer})
      \end{array}\!\!\!\right)
    \end{array}\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Load } {\ast}(\textsc{reg}_1) \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_2 \hfill \circled{2}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\begin{array}{ll}
      \mathbf{let} & \mathit{pt}_1 = \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}(\textsc{reg}_1) \\
      \mathbf{in}  & \left(\begin{array}{rl}
        \mathit{regs} \textsc{ reg}_1 = &\!\!\!\mathit{pt}_1[\mathit{nonPointer} = \mathit{false}] \\
        \textit{regs} \textsc{ reg}_2 = &\!\!\!\left(\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\!\!\begin{array}{l}
            (\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{stackPointer} \wedge \mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInStack}) \vee\\
            (\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{otherPointer} \wedge \mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInOther})
          \end{array}\\
          \!\!\!\mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}
        \end{array}\!\!\!\!\!\!\right)\\
        \textit{regs r} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[r]\\
        \!\!\!\mathit{stackInStack} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInStack} \\
        \!\!\!\mathit{stackInOther} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInOther}
      \end{array}\!\!\!\!\!\right)
    \end{array}\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Copy } k \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_1 \hfill \circled{3}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\mathit{pre}\left[regs[\textsc{reg}_1] = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
        \mathit{nonPointer} = & \!\!\!\smBadPtr{k}\\
        \mathit{stackPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{false}\\
        \mathit{otherPointer} = & \!\!\!{\neg}\smBadPtr{k}\\
      \end{array}\right)\right]\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Copy } k + \textsc{reg}_1 \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_2 \hfill \circled{4}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\mathit{pre}\left[regs[\textsc{reg}_2] = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
        \mathit{nonPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1].\mathit{nonPointer}\\
        \mathit{stackPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1].\mathit{stackPointer}\\
        \mathit{otherPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1].\mathit{otherPointer} \vee {\neg}\smBadPtr{k}\\
      \end{array}\right)\right]\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Copy } k {\oplus} \textsc{reg}_1 \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_2 \hfill \circled{5}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\mathit{pre}\left[regs[\textsc{reg}_2] = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
        \mathit{nonPointer} = & \!\!\!\true\\
        \mathit{stackPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1].\mathit{stackPointer}\\
        \mathit{otherPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1].\mathit{otherPointer} \vee {\neg}\smBadPtr{k}\\
      \end{array}\right)\right]\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Copy } \textsc{reg}_1 {\oplus} \textsc{reg}_2 \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_3 \hfill \circled{6}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\begin{array}{ll}
      \mathbf{let} & \mathit{pt}_1 = \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1]\\
                   & \mathit{pt}_2 = \mathit{pre}.\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_2]\\
      \mathbf{in}  & \mathit{pre}\left[regs[\textsc{reg}_1] = \left(\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{true}\\
          \mathit{stackPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{stackPointer} \vee \mathit{pt}_2.\mathit{stackPointer}\\
          \mathit{otherPointer} = & \!\!\!\mathit{pt}_1.\mathit{otherPointer} \vee \mathit{pt}_2.\mathit{otherPointer}\\
        \end{array}\right)\right]
    \end{array}\\
    \hline
    \textsc{Call} \hfill \circled{7}\\
    \hspace{10mm}\textrm{See main text}
  \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Rules for calculating the \textsc{configuration} at the end
    of an instruction.  $\mathit{pre}$ is the \textsc{configuration}
    at the start of the instruction, $\textsc{reg}_i$ are registers,
    $k$ is a constant, and $\oplus$ is any operator other than $+$.
    Further details are given in the main text.}
  \label{fig:static_alias:update_rules}
\end{figure}

The analysis relies on being able to generate the
\textsc{configuration} at the end of an instruction given the
instruction and the \textsc{configuration} at the start of the
instruction.  If the starting \textsc{configuration} is $\bot$ then
the ending one is also $\bot$.  Otherwise, the analysis uses the rules
shown in Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:update_rules}.

\begin{itemize}
\item[\circled{1}] The first rule in the figure shows how to handle
  store-like instructions.  The notation is intended to indicate an
  instruction which stores the value of register $\textsc{reg}_1$ to
  the memory location given by $\textsc{reg}_2$.  The update to the
  \textsc{configuration} has three parts:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item $\mathit{regs}$ is updated to record the fact that, if this
    instruction completes, $\textsc{reg}_2$ is definitely a valid
    pointer.  The $a[b = c]$ notation in the figure is intended to
    evaluate to the $a$ structure with field $b$ set to $c$.
  \item $\mathit{stackInStack}$ is set to $\mathit{true}$ if
    $\textsc{reg}_1$ might point at the stack and $\textsc{reg}_2$
    might also point at the stack.
  \item $\mathit{stackInOther}$ is set to $\mathit{true}$ if
    $\textsc{reg}_1$ might point at the stack and $\textsc{reg}_2$
    might point at some non-stack location.
  \end{itemize}
\item[\circled{2}] The second rule shows how to handle an instruction
  which loads register $\textsc{reg}_2$ from the memory location
  referenced by $\textsc{reg}_1$.  The end-of-instruction
  \textsc{configuration} is the same as the start-of-instruction one,
  with two exceptions:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item $\textsc{reg}_1$ is marked as being definitely a valid pointer.
  \item $\textsc{reg}_2$ is recalculated.  After the load, it might
    always be a non-pointer or a pointer to non-stack memory, and it
    might be a pointer to stack memory if either $\textsc{reg}_1$ is a
    pointer to the stack and the stack might contain a pointer to
    itself or if $\textsc{reg}_1$ might be a pointer to non-stack
    memory and there might be any pointers to the stack from other
    memory\editorial{Long sentence}.
  \end{itemize}
\item[\circled{3}] This rule shows how to handle an instruction which
  sets a register to a constant.  The only change here is to
  recalculate $\mathit{regs}[\textsc{reg}_1]$:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item $\mathit{stackPointer}$ is set to $\mathit{false}$.  This
    reflects the assumption that stack frames are allocated by
    \texttt{call} instructions, and so their address cannot be
    statically known, and so no pointer to a stack frame can ever
    appear in a constant address.
  \item The new value of $\mathit{nonPointer}$ is calculated by
    comparing the constant $k$ to the memory map in the program's
    binary.  Any locations not present in that map are treated
    as being potential non-pointers, and any which are present
    are assumed to be definitely valid pointers.
  \item $\mathit{otherPointer}$ is likewise calculate from the
    program's memory map.  This is perhaps more surprising: setting
    $\mathit{otherPointer}$ to $\mathit{false}$ indicates that the
    register cannot be a valid pointer, but there clearly are valid
    memory locations in a running program which are not included in
    its binary, and so this would appear, on first inspection, to be
    unsafe.  In practice, however, it is not, because this rule will
    only be triggered by compile-time constants, and most operating
    systems make it difficult to allocate memory at a fixed address
    except via the memory map in the binary\footnote{Doing so is
      inherently dangerous in any but the most simple programs, due to
      the risk of accidentally colliding with a dynamically allocated
      structure maintained by a library, and so it is essentially
      never done in real programs.}.
  \end{itemize}

\item[\circled{4}] The fourth rule handles instructions which set one
  register to be another plus a constant offset (including a constant
  offset of zero).  In this case, the configuration of one register is
  simply copied to the other.  The assumption here is that the program
  will never generate a pointer to the stack frame by means of a
  constant offset from a pointer to something else, or vice versa,
  which is reasonable given the assumption that frames are allocated
  by \texttt{call} instructions.

  This rule is potentially dangerous, in that it assumes that if $x$
  is a valid pointer then so is $x+k$, for any constant $k$.  This is
  not guaranteed to be true if $x$ is near to the end of an object or
  if $k$ is very large, but is in practice reasonable given common
  programming practice.

\item[\circled{5},\circled{6}] This analysis has no special knowledge
  for any operators other than $+$.  The result might always be a
  non-pointer, and might be a pointer to anything which any of the
  inputs point to.

\item[\circled{7}] Handling called sub-functions requires some care,
  as this is a function-local analysis and so the bodies of
  sub-functions are not available for analysis.  Fortunately,
  reasonable results can be obtained by making some simple assumptions
  which hold for the vast majority of functions:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item
    Functions must obey the standard function call ABI.  In
    particular, functions must either return to the instruction
    immediately after the call instruction or not return at all, and,
    when they do return, they must not modify call-preserved
    registers, and should only return values through the designated
    return value register.
  \item
    Functions must not ``invent'' pointers to their caller's stack
    frame by offsetting from the stack pointer, but must instead
    receive such pointers from their caller, whether as formal
    parameters or via memory.  This assumption is also made in rule
    \circled{4}.
  \item
    The called function must take all of its arguments in the ABI's
    designated argument-passing registers.  Within that set,
    {\technique} uses a separate register liveness analysis to
    determine which argument registers a given function actually uses.
    This liveness analysis is entirely conventional and is not
    discussed here, beyond noting that it analyses the entire program
    at once, across function boundaries, and handles library functions
    conservatively by assuming that they consume all ABI argument
    registers.

    Arguments passed via the stack are completely ignored by both the
    points-to and register liveness analyses (or, equivalently, they
    are assumed to never contain pointers to the current frame).  This
    is unsound.  In practice, however, this unsoundness is rarely
    important, as most function's arguments are passed via registers.
    \todo{Blurgh.}
  \end{itemize}

  Given those assumptions, defining the \textsc{configuration} after
  \texttt{call} instructions is straightforward.  There are two cases:
  where the current stack frame reaches the called function, whether
  via registers or via pointers to the frame in non-stack memory, and
  those where it does not.  The two cases are illustrated in
  Figure~\ref{fig:static_alias:call_instrs}.  In both cases, the
  called function is assumed to clobber all of the registers which are
  defined as call clobbered in the platform ABI, and to return a value
  in the ABI return register.  In the case where it does receive a
  stack pointer, it is assumed to also write the stack pointer to
  every location which it can reach.  This is safe, provided that the
  assumptions above hold, but is also quite conservative.
\end{itemize}

\begin{figure}
  \subfigure[][Stack does not reach callee]{
    \hspace{-10mm}
    \begin{math}
      \begin{array}{rrl}
        \textit{regs} & \mathit{ret} = &\!\!\!\left(\!\!\!\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
          \mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
          \mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
        \end{array}\!\!\!\right)\\
        \textit{regs} & r \in \mathit{clobbered} = &\!\!\!\left(\!\!\!\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
          \mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
          \mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
        \end{array}\!\!\!\right)\\
        \textit{regs} & r = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\textit{regs r} \\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInStack}} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInStack} \\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInOther}} = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\mathit{stackInOther}
      \end{array}
    \end{math}
  }
  \subfigure[][Stack does reach callee]{
    \hspace{-5mm}
    \begin{math}
      \begin{array}{rrl}
        \textit{regs} & \mathit{ra} = &\!\!\!\left(\!\!\!\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
          \mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
          \mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
        \end{array}\!\!\!\right)\\
        \textit{regs} & r \in \mathit{clobbered} = &\!\!\!\left(\!\!\!\begin{array}{rl}
          \mathit{nonPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
          \mathit{stackPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
          \mathit{otherPointer} = &\!\!\!\mathit{false} \\
        \end{array}\!\!\!\right)\\
        \textit{regs} & r = &\!\!\!\mathit{pre}.\textit{regs r} \\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInStack}} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true} \\
        \multicolumn{2}{l}{\mathit{stackInOther}} = &\!\!\!\mathit{true}
      \end{array}
    \end{math}
  }
  \caption{Handling of \texttt{call} instructions.  \textit{clobbered}
    is the set of call clobbered registers in the platform ABI and
    \textit{ret} is the ABI return register. \todo{Tidy up to not hang
      off page}}
  \label{fig:static_alias:call_instrs}
\end{figure}

Most non-control flow instructions in the AMD64 instruction set can be
expressed in terms of these simple operations, but the full expansion
is quite tedious and I do not give details here.  

\todo{Need to eval how effective all of this actually is.}\smh{Ack;
  also maybe look at how effective it would be to use more distinct
  locations (i.e. a greater number of locations).}

\section{The known register analysis}
\label{sect:program_model:fixed_regs}

In many cases the value of a register at a particular instruction is
either a fixed constant or a fixed offset from another register.  This
analysis attempts to discover such fixed relationships.  The structure
of the analysis is broadly similar to the static alias analysis:
define a domain of \textsc{Configuration}s
(Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:configuration}), a join operator for them
(Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:join_op}), and an abstract interpretation
relation for instructions (Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:update_rule}),
and then build a mapping from instructions to \textsc{Configuration}s
by taking the least fixed point.  I now describe these diagrams in
more detail.

\todo{Mention that this is most useful for figuring out DF, so that
  memcpy etc. work, and for getting rid of frame pointers.}

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:configuration}, the abstract domain}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{rcl}
      \textsc{RegValue} & = & (\mathit{invalid}:1) + (\mathit{const}:\textsc{Integer}) + \\
                        &   & {\quad\quad\quad} (\mathit{regOffset}:\left(\mathit{reg}: \textsc{Reg}, \mathit{offset}: \textsc{Integer}\right)) \\
      \\
      \textsc{Configuration} & = & (\mathit{unreachable}:1) + (\mathit{reachable}: \textsc{Reg} \rightarrow \textsc{RegValue})\\
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{\textsc{Configuration} type for the known register analysis}
  \label{fig:known_regs:configuration}
\end{figure}

Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:configuration} gives the abstract domain
for the known register analysis.  A \textsc{Configuration} here is
either \textit{unreachable}, indicating that no paths to the
instruction have yet been discovered, or \textit{reachable}, in which
case the \textsc{Configuration} consists of a mapping from
\textsc{Reg}isters to \textsc{RegValue}s.  A \textsc{RegValue} is in
turn either \textit{const k}, indicating that the register is the
constant $k$, \textit{regOffset r k}, indicating that this register is
equal to $r + k$, where $r$ is some other register, or
$\mathit{invalid}$, indicating that the register does not fit one of
those forms.

The initial value for the fixed point iteration has every instruction
\textit{unreachable} except for the \backref{function head}
instruction, which is a \textit{reachable} whose contents reflects
whatever constraints the system ABI imposes at the start of a
function.  For Linux on AMD64, the only such constraint is that the
direction flag in \texttt{rflags} is equal to 1.  {\Implementation}
stores the direction flag in its own register \textsc{df}, and so the initial
configuration is just:
\begin{displaymath}
  \mathit{reachable} \{ \textsc{df} \rightarrow \textit{const }1 \}
\end{displaymath}

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:join_op}, the join operator}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{l}
      \begin{array}{rl}
        \cup : & \textsc{RegValue} \rightarrow \textsc{RegValue} \rightarrow \textsc{RegValue} \\
        \sqcup : & \textsc{Configuration} \rightarrow \textsc{Configuration} \rightarrow \textsc{Configuration}
      \end{array}\\\\
      \begin{array}{rclcll}
        x & \cup & y & = & x                & \textrm{if } x = y\\
        x & \cup & y & = & \mathit{invalid} & \textrm{otherwise} \\
        \\
        \mathit{unreachable} & \sqcup & x & = & x \\
        x & \sqcup & \mathit{unreachable} & = & x \\
        \textit{reachable x} & \sqcup & \textit{reachable y} & = & \textit{reachable } (r \rightarrow \textit{x r} \cup \textit{y r})
      \end{array}
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Join operator $\sqcup$ operator for known register analysis \textsc{Configuration}s.}
  \label{fig:known_regs:join_op}
\end{figure}

Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:join_op} shows the join operator $\sqcup$
on \textsc{Configuration}s.  If one of the predecessor states is
unreachable, the operator takes the \textsc{Configuration} from its
other predecessor; otherwise, it performs a point-wise join of the
values for the individual registers using the $\cup$ operator.  The
$\cup$ operator is, again, simple: if its arguments are equal, it
returns them, and otherwise it returns \textit{invalid}.

\paragraph{Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:update_rule}, the update rule}

\begin{figure}
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{l}
      \hspace{\columnwidth}~\\
      \textsc{Copy } k \rightarrow \textsc{reg} \hfill \circled{1}\\
      \hspace{10mm}\textit{reachable }\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
      \textsc{reg}     & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{const k}\\
      \textsc{reg}' \hspace{1mm} \multirow{2}{*}{\begin{math}
          \left|\hspace{-1mm}\begin{array}{l}
          \textit{old \textsc{reg}' = offset \textsc{reg} k'} \\
          \textit{otherwise}
          \end{array}\right.
        \end{math}
      }\hspace{-5mm}   & \!\!\!\rightarrow \mathit{invalid}\\
                       & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}'\\
      \end{array}\hfill\right\}\quad\\

      \hline
      \textsc{Copy } k + \textsc{reg} \rightarrow \textsc{reg} \hfill \circled{2}\\
      \hspace{10mm}\textit{reachable }\left\{\begin{array}{lll}
        \textsc{reg} & \multirow{3}{*}{\begin{math}
            \left|\hspace{-1mm}\begin{array}{l}
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg} = \mathit{invalid}\\
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg} = \textit{const }k'\\
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg} = \textit{offset r } k'\\
            \end{array}\right.
          \end{math}
        } & \!\!\!\rightarrow \mathit{invalid} \\
        & & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{const k + }k' \\
        & & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{offset r }(k + k')\\
        \vspace{-2mm}\\
        \textsc{reg}' & \multirow{2}{*}{\begin{math}
            \left|\hspace{-1mm}\begin{array}{l}
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}' = \textit{offset \textsc{reg} }k'\\
              \mathit{otherwise}\\
            \end{array}\right.
          \end{math}
        } & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{offset \textsc{reg} } (k'-k) \\
        & & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{pre }r'\\
      \end{array}\right\}\\

      \hline
      \textsc{Copy } k + \textsc{reg}_1 \rightarrow \textsc{reg}_2 \textrm{ where } \textsc{reg}_1 \not= \textsc{reg}_2 \hfill \circled{3}\\
      \hspace{10mm}\textit{reachable }\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
        \textsc{reg}_2 & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{offset }\textsc{reg}_1 \textit{ k} \\
        \textsc{reg}' \multirow{2}{*}{\begin{math}
            \left|\hspace{-1mm}\begin{array}{l}
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}' = \textit{offset }\textsc{reg}_2 \textit{ } k' \\
              \textit{otherwise}\\
            \end{array}\right.
          \end{math}
        } & \!\!\!\rightarrow \mathit{invalid}\\
          & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}'\\
      \end{array}\right\}\\

      \hline
      \textrm{Other updates of }\textsc{reg} \hfill \circled{4}\\
      \hspace{10mm}\textit{reachable }\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
        \textsc{reg} & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{invalid} \\
        \textsc{reg}' \multirow{2}{*}{\begin{math}
            \left|\hspace{-1mm}\begin{array}{l}
              \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}' = \textit{offset }\textsc{reg} \textit{ } k \\
              \textit{otherwise}\\
            \end{array}\right.
          \end{math}
        } & \!\!\!\rightarrow \mathit{invalid}\\
          & \!\!\!\rightarrow \textit{pre }\textsc{reg}'\\
      \end{array}\right\}\\
      
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
  \caption{Update rule for known register analysis \textsc{Configuration}s.}
  \label{fig:known_regs:update_rule}
\end{figure}

Figure~\ref{fig:known_regs:update_rule} shows how to calculate the
\textsc{Configuration} at the end of an instruction from the
\textsc{Configuration} at the start, when that is not
\textit{unreachable}, for some simple instructions.

\begin{itemize}
\item[\circled{1}] If the instruction sets a register to a constant $k$,
  the update rule first sets that register to \textit{const k} and then
  invalidates any other registers which are currently believed to be a
  fixed offset from that register.
\item[\circled{2}] This rule handles instructions which update a
  register by adding a constant.  There are two parts to this: the
  register which was updated must have the constant added to its
  value, and registers which were defined in terms of the register
  must have the constant subtracted from there value.
\item[\circled{3}] The third rule shows how to handle instructions
  which set a register $\textsc{reg}_2$ to be equal to another
  register $\textsc{reg}_1$ plus a constant $k$\footnote{Which might
    be zero or negative.}.  $\textsc{reg}_2$ is set to $\textit{offset
  }\textsc{reg}_1\textit{ k}$, and any registers defined in terms of
  $\textsc{reg}_2$ are invalidated.
\item[\circled{4}] The final rule handles all other types of
  instructions which update a register $\textsc{reg}$.  This rule
  simply invalidates the entry for $\textsc{reg}$ and all registers
  which are defined in terms of it.  This is quite conservative.  For
  instance, the instruction is adding two registers both of which have
  known values it would be easy to constant-fold the values together.
  This is unlikely to be helpful for programs produced with optimising
  compilers, as even a very basic optimising compiler will itself
  perform constant folding optimisations, and so there will be no
  further opportunity to apply them to the compiled binary.
\end{itemize}

\todo{Need to eval how often this works, as well.}
